@setfilename function-convert.info
@settitle Function Convert Manual

@node function_convert_overview
@chapter Function Convert

@section Overview

The @code{function_convert} package rewrites all occurrences of one function in terms of another within a 
Maxima expression. Specifically, a @dfn{converter} is a rule @code{f = g} that specifies how calls to @code{f} should 
 expressed using the function @code{g}. Converters may express identities, special-function relations, 
 or any user-defined transformation that can be written as a Maxima function.

Unlike literal renaming, a converter expresses a @emph{semantic} relationship. For example, the 
converter @code{sinc = sin} does not literally replace the symbol @code{sinc} by @code{sin}; instead it applies 
the identity @code{sinc(x) = sin(x)/x}, replacing the left-hand side with the right-hand side in a given 
Maxima expression. Converters may be chained, and the system maintains an internal directed graph of all 
available conversions.

Specifically, a rule has the form @code{f = g}, where @code{f} is the @emph{source function} and 
the @emph{target function} @code{g} is either:

@itemize @minus
@item the name of a target function,
@item a Maxima lambda expression, or
@item the name of a  Maxima function, possibly user-defined.
@end itemize

Multiple converters may be applied in sequence.  When the user supplies a list of converters, they are applied 
from left to right.  When the system searches for a path automatically (via @code{make_conversion_path}), 
it uses a breadth-first search of the converter graph to find a shortest path.

The converter system does not modify Maxima’s simplifier; all conversions occur only when explicitly requested 
by the user.

The user-level interface consists of functions for applying converters, inspecting the converter graph, 
constructing conversion paths, and registering or deleting user-defined converters.

@section User-Level Functions

The following functions make up the user-level interface to the converter system:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{function_convert(converters, expr)}  
Apply one or more conversion rules to an expression.  
See @ref{function_convert}.

@item @code{list_converters([name_1, name_2, ...])}  
List all registered converters, optionally filtered by source function.  
See @ref{list_converters}.

@item @code{describe_converter(f = g)}  
Display detailed information about a specific converter.  
See @ref{describe_converter}.

@item @code{delete_converter(rules)}  
Delete one or more user-defined converters.  
See @ref{delete_converter}.

@item @code{delete_all_user_converters()}  
Remove all user-defined converters at once.  
See @ref{delete_all_user_converters}.

@item @code{make_conversion_path(from, to)}  
Construct a list of adjacent conversion steps forming a path from
@code{from} to @code{to}.  
See @ref{make_conversion_path}.

@item @code{register_converter(spec, fn, doc)}  
Register a new converter, optionally with an alias and documentation.  
See @ref{register_converter}.
@end itemize



@node function_convert
@section function_convert
@deffn Function function_convert (@var{rules}, @var{expr})

Apply one or more function-conversion rules to the expression @var{expr}.
The argument @var{rules} is either a single conversion rule
@code{f = g} or a Maxima list of such rules.

A conversion rule has the form @code{f = g}, where @code{f} is the
source function and @code{g} is either the name of the target function,
a Maxima lambda expression, or the name of a user-defined Maxima
function.

The operator @code{=} indicates a @emph{semantic} conversion, not a
literal renaming.  For example, the rule @code{sinc = sin} does not
replace the symbol @code{sinc} by @code{sin}.  Instead, it applies the
identity @code{sinc(x) = sin(x)/x}.  Specifically:

@example
(%i1) function_convert('sinc = 'sin, sinc(x) + 1);
                                  sin(x)
(%o1)                             ------ + 1
                                    x
@end example

Users may also supply an explicit conversion by giving a lambda
expression on the right-hand side.  For example:

@example
(%i2) function_convert('erfc = lambda([q], 1 - erf(q)), erfc(x)^2);
                                             2
(%o2)                            (1 - erf(x))
@end example

Multiple conversions may be given in a Maxima list; they are applied
from left to right.

@strong{Example}

@example
(%i3) function_convert(['sinc = 'sin, 'sin = 'exp], sinc(x));
                                %i x     - %i x
                             (%e     - %e      ) %i
(%o3)                      - ----------------------- 
                                      2 x
@end example

@end deffn

@node list_converters
@section list_converters
@deffn Function list_converters ([name_1, name_2, ...])

Return a list of all registered function converters known to @code{function_convert}.  In addition to 
returning this list, each converter is printed as a pair @code{FROM = TO} followed by a short description 
of the converter.

When called with no arguments, @code{list_converters} returns the full
set of converters.  When one or more names are supplied, only those
converters whose source function matches one of the given names are
returned.

@example
(%i2) list_converters();
psi = psi_half :  Apply the polygamma half-argument identity; see DLMF
     http://dlmf.nist.gov/5.5.E8

inequation = zero_lhs :  Normalize an inequation `a op b` to the zero LHS form
     `(a - b) op 0`.

...
@end example

The list of converters is maintained internally and entries appear in an unspecified order.  

@seealso{function_convert}
@end deffn


@node describe_converter
@section describe_converter
@defun describe_converter (rule)
Describe the converter specified by @var{rule}, which must be a single
converter of the form @code{f = g}.  If a converter from
@code{f} to @code{g} is defined, @code{describe_converter} prints the
converter, indicates whether it is built-in or user-defined, and
displays a short description if one is available.  The function returns
the symbol @code{done}.

If no such converter exists, a message stating this is printed.  If the
input is not a valid converter equation, an error is signaled.

@example
(%i1) describe_converter(sinc = sin);
Converter: sinc = sin
Type: built-in
Docstring: Convert sinc(x) into sin(x)/x.
(%o1)                                done

(%i2) describe_converter(a = b);
No converter defined for a = b
(%o2)                                done

(%i3) describe_converter(a < b);
Bad transformation (missing =): a < b
@end example

@end defun

@node delete_converter
@section delete_converter
@defun delete_converter (rules)

Delete one or more user-defined converters.  The argument @var{rules}
may be either a single converter rule of the form @code{f = g} or a
list of such rules.  The function returns the symbol @code{done}.

If a listed converter is built-in, an informational message is printed
and the converter is not deleted; for example:

@example
(%i1) delete_converter(sinc = sin);
Cannot delete built-in converter sinc = sin.
(%o1)                                done
@end example

If a listed converter does not exist as a user-defined converter, a
message is printed and nothing is removed:

@example
(%i1) delete_converter(a = b);
No converter a = b exists.
(%o1)                                done
@end example

The following example illustrates deletion of a user-defined rule.  The
rule applies @code{radcan} to every subexpression of the form
@code{a^b}, but does not apply @code{radcan} to the entire input.
After deleting the rule, applying it returns the input unchanged:

@example
(%i1) register_converter("^" = radcan, lambda([a,b], radcan(a^b)));
(%o1)                                done

(%i2) function_convert("^" = radcan, (1+x)^2 + a*(b+1));
                            2
(%o2)                      x  + 2 x + a (b + 1) + 1

(%i3) delete_converter("^" = radcan);
Deleted converter ^ = radcan.
(%o3)                                done

(%i4) function_convert("^" = radcan, (1+x)^2 + a*(b+1));
                                    2
(%o4)                        (x + 1)  + a (b + 1)
@end example

@end defun

@node delete_all_user_converters
@section delete_all_user_converters
@defun delete_all_user_converters ()
Delete all user-defined converters.  All built-in converters are
preserved.  A message is printed indicating that the user-defined
converters have been removed.  The function returns @code{done}.

@example
(%i1) register_converter("^" = radcan, lambda([a,b], radcan(a^b)));
(%o1)

(%i2) delete_all_user_converters();
All user-defined converters deleted.
(%o2)                                done
@end example

@end defun


@node make_conversion_path
@section make_conversion_path
@deffn {Function} make_conversion_path (@var{from}, @var{to})


Find a shortest conversion path from @var{from} to @var{to}.  The
function performs a breadth-first search of the full converter graph
and returns one such path, represented as a Maxima list of converter
rules @code{f = g}.  If several shortest paths exist, one is chosen
according to the system's internal graph-traversal order; the choice
among equal-length paths is not user-configurable.  All properly
registered user-level converters may appear as links in a path.

The function @code{make_conversion_path} does not perform any
conversions.  To apply the path, call @code{function_convert} with the
list returned by @code{make_conversion_path}.  If no path exists, the
empty list @code{[]} is returned.

@example
(%i1) path : make_conversion_path(sin, gamma);
(%o1) [sin = sinc, sinc = gamma]

(%i2) function_convert(path, sin(x));
(%o2) x/(gamma(1 - x/%pi) * gamma(x/%pi + 1))
@end example

@end deffn

@node register_converter
@section register_converter
@defun register_converter (rule, fn, &optional doc)
Register a new converter.

The argument @var{rule} is either a single converter rule of the form
@code{f = g}, or a two-element Maxima list @code{[f = g, p = q]}.  In
the first case, the primary converter is @code{f = g} and it
has no alias. In the second case, the first element of the list is 
 primary converter rule and the second element is its alias.

If either the primary rule or the alias rule is not of the correct
form, an error is signaled. If a converter from @code{f} to @code{g}
already exists, an error is also signaled: built-in converters cannot
be redefined, and redefining a user-defined converter is allowed, but
a informational message is printed.

The argument @code{fn} must be either a Maxima function or a Maxima
lambda form; otherwise an error is signaled.  If a string @var{doc} is
supplied, it is stored as the documentation for this converter, and is
displayed by @code{describe_converter}.

The function returns the symbol @code{done}.

Here we define a converter that applies @code{radcan} to all subexpressions of
the form @code{a^b}. Since the source function @code{"^"} is a function of
two variables, the associated function @emph{must} be a function of two variables. 
Notice that in @code{(%i2)}, the term @code{a*(b+1)} is @emph{not} touched by @code{radcan}.

@example 
(%i1) register_converter("^" = radcan, lambda([a,b], radcan(a^b)));
(%o1)                                done

(%i2) function_convert("^" = radcan, (1+x)^2 + a*(b+1));
                            2
(%o2)                      x  + 2 x + a (b + 1) + 1
@end example
Instead of using a Maxima lambda form for the function, we can use the name of a Maxima function; for example
@example 
(%i1) fff(a,b) := radcan(a^b)$

(%i2) register_converter("^" = radcan, fff);
(%o2)                                done
(%i3) function_convert("^" = radcan, (1+x)^2 + a*(b+1));
                            2
(%o3)                      x  + 2 x + a (b + 1) + 1
@end example

An example of including an alias: 
@example
(%i3) register_converter(["^^" = expand, ppp = qqq], lambda([a,b], expand(a^^b)));
(%o3)                                done

(%i4) function_convert("^^" = expand, (x+1)^^2);
                                 <2>
(%o4)                           x    + 2 x + 1

(%i5) function_convert(ppp = qqq, (x+1)^^2);
                                 <2>
(%o5)                           x    + 2 x + 1
@end example

Redefining a built-in converter signals an error:
@example 
(%i1) sinc_to_sin(x) := sin(x)/x$

(%i2) register_converter(sinc = sin, sinc_to_sin);
Cannot redefine built-in converter: sinc = sin
@end example

But redefining a non-built-in converter is allowed:
@example 
(%i3) register_converter(sinc = fff, sinc_to_sin);
(%o3)                                done

(%i4) register_converter(sinc = fff, sinc_to_sin);
Redefining converter sinc = fff
(%o4)                                done

@end example
@end defun


@section Built-in Converters

The function @code{list_converters()} displays all registered converters, including user-defined ones, 
together with a short description when available. The built-in converters are:

@table @code

@item psi = psi_half
Apply the polygamma half-argument identity.  See DLMF
@url{http://dlmf.nist.gov/5.5.E8}.

@item bessel = bessel_recursion
Rewrite Bessel functions using standard recursion identities.

@item inequation = zero_lhs
Normalize an inequation @code{a op b} to the zero-LHS form
@code{(a - b) op 0}.

@item exp = hyperbolic
Rewrite exponential functions in terms of hyperbolic functions.

@item gamma = binomial
Rewrite products of gamma functions into a binomial coefficient when
possible.  This converter looks for subexpressions of the form
@code{gamma(a+1)/(gamma(b+1)*gamma(a+1-b))} and replaces them with
@code{binomial(a,b)}.  Only explicit occurrences of this three-factor
pattern are transformed; the converter does not rewrite @code{gamma(a)}
or @code{gamma(b)} individually, nor does it attempt to derive a
binomial coefficient from expressions where the pattern is not present
as an actual subexpression.

@item gamma = beta
Rewrite products of gamma functions into beta functions when possible.
This converter looks for subexpressions of the form
@code{gamma(a)*gamma(b)/gamma(a+b)} and replaces them with
@code{beta(a,b)}. Only explicit occurrences of this three-factor
pattern are transformed; the converter does not rewrite @code{gamma(a)}
or @code{gamma(b)} individually, nor does it attempt to derive
@code{beta(a,b)} from expressions where the pattern is not present as an
actual subexpression.

@item gamma_like = gamma
Normalize gamma-like functions to @code{gamma}.

@item hyperbolic = hyperbolic_tanh_half_angle
Rewrite hyperbolic functions in terms of the tanh half-angle substitution
@code{u = tanh(z/2)}, producing rational functions of @code{u}:
@display
sinh(z) = 2 u / (1 - u^2)
cosh(z) = (1 + u^2) / (1 - u^2)
tanh(z) = 2 u / (1 + u^2)
sech(z) = (1 - u^2) / (1 + u^2)
csch(z) = (1 - u^2) / (2 u)
coth(z) = (1 + u^2) / (2 u)
@end display

@item trig = trig_tan_half_angle
Rewrite trigonometric functions in terms of the tangent half-angle
substitution @code{t = tan(z/2)}, producing rational functions of
@code{t}:
@display
sin(z) = 2 t / (1 + t^2)
cos(z) = (1 - t^2) / (1 + t^2)
tan(z) = 2 t / (1 - t^2)
sec(z) = (1 + t^2) / (1 - t^2)
csc(z) = (1 + t^2) / (2 t)
cot(z) = (1 - t^2) / (2 t)
@end display

@item exp = trig
Rewrite exponential functions in terms of trigonometric functions.

@item inverse_trig = log
Convert inverse trigonometric functions to logarithmic form.

@item hyperbolic = exp
Convert hyperbolic functions to exponential form.

@item trig = exp
Convert trigonometric functions to exponential form.

@item trig = sin_cos
Convert all six trigonometric functions to @code{sin}/@code{cos} form.

@item gamma = sin
Apply the identity @code{gamma(x)*gamma(1-x) = %pi/sin(%pi*x)}.

@item trig = normalize_trig_argument
Normalize the argument of trigonometric functions when the argument is a
first-degree polynomial in @code{%pi}.

@item hstep = signum
Convert @code{hstep(x)} into @code{(1 + signum(x))/2}.

@item signum = hstep
Convert @code{signum(x)} into @code{2*hstep(x) - 1}.

@item abs = sqrt
Convert @code{abs(x)} into @code{sqrt(x^2)}.  When @code{radexpand} is
true, this is simplified back to @code{abs(x)}.

@item signum = abs
Convert subexpressions of the form @code{X*signum(X)} into @code{abs(X)}.
This converter does not rewrite @code{signum(X)} itself, since
@code{X*signum(X)} is not a subexpression of @code{signum(X)}.

@item abs = signum
Convert @code{abs(x)} into @code{conjugate(x)*signum(x)}.

@item erf = hypergeometric
Convert @code{erf(x)} into
@code{(2*x/sqrt(%pi))*hypergeometric([1/2],[3/2],-x^2)}.

@item erf = integral
Convert @code{erf(x)} into an integral representation.

@item erfc = erf
Convert @code{erfc(x)} into @code{1 - erf(x)}.

@item erf = erfc
Convert @code{erf(x)} into @code{1 - erfc(x)}.

@item erf = erfi
Convert @code{erf(x)} into @code{i*erfi(-i*x)}.

@item erfi = erf
Convert @code{erfi(x)} into @code{-i*erf(i*x)}.

@item ^ = trigreduce
Convert integer powers of trigonometric functions to a Fourier sum.

@item gamma_incomplete = expand
Expand incomplete gamma functions.

@item atan = log
Convert @code{atan(x)} to logarithmic form.

@item factorial = product
Convert @code{n!} to @code{product(g,g,1,n)}.

@item binomial = factorial
Convert @code{binomial(n,k)} to factorial form.

@item log10 = log
Convert @code{log10(x)} into @code{log(x)/log(10)}.

@item genfact = pochhammer
Convert @code{genfact} to @code{pochhammer} form.

@item tanh = sinh
Convert @code{tanh(x)} into @code{sinh(x)/cosh(x)}.

@item tan = sin
Convert @code{tan(x)} into @code{sin(x)/cos(x)}.

@item csc = sin
Convert @code{csc(x)} into @code{1/sin(x)}.

@item sin = sinc
Convert @code{sin(x)} into @code{x*sinc(x)}.

@item sinc = gamma
Convert @code{sinc(x)} into
@code{1/(gamma(1+x/%pi)*gamma(1-x/%pi))}.

@item sinc = sin
Convert @code{sinc(x)} into @code{sin(x)/x}.

@end table